Caching at different levels:

Most common cache we saw was redis but that is not the only type of cache out there or not the only place that can be used as a cache.

Literally every piece| component in our infrastructure can be used as a cache.
But should we? 
it depends on the guarantees
also too much caching is bad => stale data and invalidation


Client side caching: 
Storing frequently accessed data on client side.
eg browser, mobile devices etc

- cache near constant data (eg: images, js files, user information etc)
- it should be okay serving cached info (stale)
- invalidation by time(expiry)

Massive performance boost, as we need not make any request to backend.


CDN(Content Delivery Network): 

CDNs are a set of servers distributed across the world. Request from a user, goes to the nearest CDN server and hence user gets very quick response.

US folks getting images from US servers is faster than fetching it from India.
CDN is live streaming, serving images, videos, audio, bundles etc
CDN also used for caching.


CDN does lazy cache population.

User request comes to CDN => closest server 
CDN server checks if it has the data 
if yes return the data 
else CDN makes the same request to origin server (actual server)
    gets the response
    caches the response
    return the data


Like any other cache, when we put data on CDN we set an expiry to it.(post which CDN deletes data)



Remote Cache(Redis) 

Remote cache is centralized cache that we most commonly use (redis). Multiple API servers use it to store frequently accessed data.

Expensive and store data in main memory

Every key stored should have an expiration(memory)
size of cache is relatively very small as compared to other caches.



Database caching: 
example: 
Instead of computing total posts by users everytime we store 'total posts' as column and update it once a while ( saves on expensive DB computation)


Note: There are other places like load balancer where we can cache things like session information

Note: we can cache some data at every single component in the system 
but should we do it ?
Not neccessarily ( it is very use case specific and subject to tolerance level of staleness of the served data)