Designing a Notification System 

Design a notification service that sends notifications to users across channel.
The system needs to be horizontally scalable and should support a very high fan-out.

Instead of directly jumping to send "millions" of notifications.
Start simple

Notification Template
We need a UI and simple backend to create notification templates that will be configured by some internal team.
Number of notification templates will not be huge and will fit on a single machine. 
Hence we start with relational DB.

Product Manager -> Notification Control Service -> Notification Meta Database (stores all templates)



When any team/product wants to send notification 
1. create a template using the notification control service 
2. specify the variables
3. note the I/O of the defined template 


Notification Channels: 
Users can be notified via multiple Channels
1. email 
2. android push notifications
3. apple push notifications
4. SMS

For each of these channels there are providers that expose APIs. We invoke them programmatically to send notifications at the very instant. 


Some example: SES, mailgun, onesignal, Twilio, msg91, etc.

So the servers that will send/trigger the actual notification will have to configure their SDKs/ libraries.

Note: The API calls are expensive network calls with high latencies (one machine will not be able to make millions of concurrent network calls)


Simple Notification Flow (one user)

1. PM creates notification template 
2. PM triggers notification the control service notifies the user instantly 

PM -> Control Service -> MetaDB 
          -> Users


1. Triggering one notification for every user is pain for PM 
2. Control service becomes the bottleneck ( network call takes time)
This is a classic place making things asynchronous ( + provider outage)

asynchronous
Sending notifications to thousands of users synchronously is a bad idea through control service ! 
 
Message contains < u1, body, channel > 
(through control service) 

        meta db 
user -> control service -> message queue(sqs) -> workers 


Keeping workers dumb -> workers 


This architecture solves retries does not overwhelm notification 



Bulk Notification: 

Above architecture works well when we have moderate traffic and notifications are triggered one to one.

a typical usecase: notify everyone 


User experience: PM submits a job to notify everyone and we need to take care of everything else.

Approach 1: control server iterates 
-> iterating through million rows takes time 
-> plus it eats up control service whose responsibility is to accept "notification requests"

Approach 2: Control server delegates iteration 

meta DB -> iterator -> sqs1 (iterator iterates through users filters out on  criteria pushes notification to sqs1) 
        -> sqs 2 -> iterator 
PM -> control service -> sqs1 -> workers -> users 
(notify(n1,e))


sqs1: notification emitter 
sqs2: user iterator and anything that requires some processing


single request goes to sqs1 
bulk request goes to sqs2



Importannt Notifications:


Some notifications are more important than others.
eg Appointment reminders >>> marketing push

In the current architecture one marketing campaign will keep executors busy and all other notifications will starve in the queue

To solve this: instead of having one notificaiton emitter queue 
we have multiple - priority wise(p1, p2,p3) and each priority has its own set of workers.



Horizontal scalability: add more queues, add more workers 

Load isolation and avoiding starvation.

No duplicate notifications


It is really irritating to recieve marketing notifications and it is the worst if we reciever multiple of the same campaign. To ensure we do not accidently send multiple notification from same campaign we keep track in a database. (KV store is fine)


Notification Tracker DB 
- light weight & shard - able 
- in memory with periodic persistence 
- bloom filter support a plus 

Redis satisfies all the 3 requests.